docs/capabilities/optimization.rst, before:

Optimization Capabilities
=========================

**PORTALS** can be used to optimize any custom function (:ref:`Optimize a custom function`) or simulations that have already been developed in the code (:ref:`Current fusion applications`), such as :ref:`VITALS` and :ref:`PRISA`.
Make sure you follow the :ref:`Installation` tutorial for information on how to get PORTALS working and how to configure your setup.

Once setup has been successful, the following regression test should run smoothly:

.. code-block:: console

   python3 $PORTALS_PATH/regressions/PORTALS_workflow.py

Current fusion applications
---------------------------

.. toctree::

   vitals_capabilities
   prisa_capabilities
   freegsu_capabilities

Optimize a custom function
--------------------------

Optimizing any function (mathematical or a simulation) with PORTALS is very easy.

For this tutorial we will need the following modules:

.. code-block:: python

   import numpy                   as np
   from portals.misc_tools        import IOtools
   from portals_opt.opt_tools     import STRATEGYtools

Select the location of the PORTALS namelist (see :ref:`Understanding the PORTALS namelist` to understand how to construct the namelist file) and the folder to work on:

.. code-block:: python

   folder    = IOtools.expandPath('$PORTALS_PATH/regressions/scratch/portals_tut/')
   namelist  = IOtools.expandPath('$PORTALS_PATH/config/main.namelist')

Then create your custom optimization object as a child of the parent ``STRATEGYtools.FUNmain`` class.
You only need to modify what operations need to occur inside the ``run()`` (where operations/simulations happen) and ``pseudo_single_objective_function()`` (to define what is the target to maximize) methods.
In this example, we are using ``x**2`` as our function with a 2% evaluation error, to find ``x`` such that ``x**2=15``:

.. code-block:: python

   class opt_class(STRATEGYtools.FUNmain):

      def __init__(self,folder,namelist=None):

         # Store folder, namelist. Read namelist
         super().__init__(folder,namelist=namelist)
         # ----------------------------------------

         # Define Problem
         self.name_objectives = ['Zval_match']

         self.Optim['ofs']     = ['z','zval']
         self.Optim['dvs']     = ['x']
         self.Optim['dvs_min'] = [0.0]
         self.Optim['dvs_max'] = [20.0]

      def run(self,paramsfile,resultsfile):

         # Read stuff
         FolderEvaluation,numEval,dictDVs,dictOFs,dictCVs = self.read(paramsfile,resultsfile)

         # Operations
         dictOFs['z']['value'] = dictDVs['x']['value']**2
         dictOFs['z']['error'] = dictOFs['z']['value'] * 2E-2

         dictOFs['zval']['value'] = 15.0
         dictOFs['zval']['error'] =  0.0

         # Write stuff
         self.write(dictOFs,resultsfile)

      def pseudo_single_objective_function(self,Y):

         ofs_ordered_names = np.array(self.Optim['ofs'])

         of  = Y[...,ofs_ordered_names == 'z']
         cal = Y[...,ofs_ordered_names == 'zval']
         res = -(of-cal).abs().mean(axis=-1,keepdim=True)

         return of,cal,res

Then, create an object from the previously defined class:

.. code-block:: python

   opt_fun1D  = opt_class(folder,namelist=namelist)

.. tip::

   Note that at this point, you can pass any parameter that you want, just changing the ``__init__()`` method as appropriate.

Now we can create and launch the PORTALS optimization process from the beginning (i.e. ``restart = True``):

.. code-block:: python

   PRF_BO = STRATEGYtools.PRF_BO( opt_fun1D, restartYN = True )
   PRF_BO.run()

Once finished, we can plot the results easily with:

.. code-block:: python

   opt_fun1D.plot_optimization_results(analysis_level=2)


Understanding the PORTALS namelist
----------------------------------

Checkout file ``$PORTALS_PATH/config/main.namelist``, which has comprehensive comments.

*Under development*

Understanding the PORTALS outputs
---------------------------------

As a result of the last step of :ref:`Optimize a custom function`, optimization results are plotted...

*Under development*

Commit message:

copied MITIM-dev docs and .read*

docs/capabilities/optimization.rst, after:

Optimization Capabilities
=========================

**MITIM** can be used to optimize any custom function (:ref:`Optimize a custom function`) or simulations that have already been developed in the code (:ref:`Current fusion applications`), such as :ref:`VITALS` and :ref:`PRISA`.
Make sure you follow the :ref:`Installation` tutorial for information on how to get MITIM working and how to configure your setup.

Once setup has been successful, the following regression test should run smoothly:

.. code-block:: console

   python3 $MITIM_PATH/tests/OPT_workflow.py

Current fusion applications
---------------------------

.. toctree::

   vitals_capabilities
   portals_capabilities
   freegsu_capabilities

Optimize a custom function
--------------------------

Optimizing any function (mathematical or a simulation) with MITIM is very easy.

For this tutorial we will need the following modules:

.. code-block:: python

   import numpy                   as np
   from mitim_tools.misc_tools        import IOtools
   from mitim_tools.opt_tools     import STRATEGYtools

Select the location of the MITIM namelist (see :ref:`Understanding the MITIM namelist` to understand how to construct the namelist file) and the folder to work on:

.. code-block:: python

   folder    = IOtools.expandPath('$MITIM_PATH/tests/scratch/mitim_tut/')
   namelist  = IOtools.expandPath('$MITIM_PATH/config/main.namelist')

Then create your custom optimization object as a child of the parent ``STRATEGYtools.FUNmain`` class.
You only need to modify what operations need to occur inside the ``run()`` (where operations/simulations happen) and ``scalarized_objective()`` (to define what is the target to maximize) methods.
In this example, we are using ``x**2`` as our function with a 2% evaluation error, to find ``x`` such that ``x**2=15``:

.. code-block:: python

   class opt_class(STRATEGYtools.FUNmain):

      def __init__(self,folder,namelist=None):

         # Store folder, namelist. Read namelist
         super().__init__(folder,namelist=namelist)
         # ----------------------------------------

         # Define Problem
         self.name_objectives = ['Zval_match']

         self.Optim['ofs']     = ['z','zval']
         self.Optim['dvs']     = ['x']
         self.Optim['dvs_min'] = [0.0]
         self.Optim['dvs_max'] = [20.0]

      def run(self,paramsfile,resultsfile):

         # Read stuff
         FolderEvaluation,numEval,dictDVs,dictOFs,dictCVs = self.read(paramsfile,resultsfile)

         # Operations
         dictOFs['z']['value'] = dictDVs['x']['value']**2
         dictOFs['z']['error'] = dictOFs['z']['value'] * 2E-2

         dictOFs['zval']['value'] = 15.0
         dictOFs['zval']['error'] =  0.0

         # Write stuff
         self.write(dictOFs,resultsfile)

      def scalarized_objective(self,Y):

         ofs_ordered_names = np.array(self.Optim['ofs'])

         of  = Y[...,ofs_ordered_names == 'z']
         cal = Y[...,ofs_ordered_names == 'zval']
         res = -(of-cal).abs().mean(axis=-1,keepdim=True)

         return of,cal,res

Then, create an object from the previously defined class:

.. code-block:: python

   opt_fun1D  = opt_class(folder,namelist=namelist)

.. tip::

   Note that at this point, you can pass any parameter that you want, just changing the ``__init__()`` method as appropriate.

Now we can create and launch the MITIM optimization process from the beginning (i.e. ``restart = True``):

.. code-block:: python

   PRF_BO = STRATEGYtools.PRF_BO( opt_fun1D, restartYN = True )
   PRF_BO.run()

Once finished, we can plot the results easily with:

.. code-block:: python

   opt_fun1D.plot_optimization_results(analysis_level=2)


Understanding the MITIM namelist
----------------------------------

Checkout file ``$MITIM_PATH/config/main.namelist``, which has comprehensive comments.

*Under development*

Understanding the MITIM outputs
---------------------------------

As a result of the last step of :ref:`Optimize a custom function`, optimization results are plotted...

*Under development*
